# potamomics
Scripts and tools used in analyzing the Potamopyrgus antipodarum genome.

# Abstract
Key unanswered questions in biology center on the causes, consequences, and maintenance of sexual reproduction (“sex”). Genome-driven processes are central to the evolutionary and genetic mechanisms inherent to sex, making genomic resources a fundamental part of answering these questions. We present the first genome assembly for a species that is perhaps uniquely well-suited for the study of (a)sex in nature, Potamopyrgus antipodarum. This New Zealand snail is unusual in featuring multiple separate transitions from obligately sexual to obligately asexual reproduction, leading to the coexistence between phenotypically similar sexual and asexual forms that is required to directly study the maintenance of sex. These separately derived asexual lineages constitute separate evolutionary experiments, providing a powerful means of characterizing how the absence of sex affects genome evolution. Our genome assembly provides critical steps towards understanding causes and consequences of sex in this system and important resources for the rapidly growing P. antipodarum and molluscan genomics research community. In characterizing this genome, we uncovered unexpected evidence for a recent whole-genome duplication (WGD) in P. antipodarum. This discovery sets the stage for evaluating processes of rediploidization immediately following WGD and assessing whether WGD might drive transitions to asexuality in P. antipodarum.

Please Cite: Jalinsky, McElroy et al., 2025 In Review.
